# BOSCH
Body sizes of aquatic macroinvertebrates from the Rhine-Main-Observatory

Project Proposal
Summary
While evidence for widespread macroinvertebrate declines mounts, few studies have investigated the effects of global change on macroinvertebrate community functional composition. However, functional trait composition is an important predictor of community stability and resilience as well as the many ecosystem services provided by macroinvertebrates. In particular, a key trait related to dispersal ability and life history, and to the biomass available to higher trophic levels is body size. Decreased body size is predicted with increasing temperature, both interspecifically (Bergmann’s Rule) and intraspecifically (James’ Rule and Temperature-Size Rule). The effect of rising temperature on body size has been shown in fish and birds, but few studies have investigated any macroinvertebrate traits using long-term sampling. We propose (i) to collect body size trait quantifying both inter- and intraspecific variability and (ii) to analyse taxonomic and functional community structure to investigate decadal changes across a long-term collection of aquatic macroinvertebrates from central Germany.

Objectives
Our primary objective is to quantify long-term changes in body size structure of macroinvertebrate communities due to rising temperatures. For studying these long-term changes in community trait composition, the Rhine-Main-Observatory (RMO) long-term aquatic macroinvertebrate collection is ideal. Advantages of this dataset include: 1) all taxa have already been identified to either species or genus level and the collection is well-curated, facilitating taxa selection and measurement, 2) it is long-term, covering 20 years, during which the average annual temperature of the site increased by 1.4°C, and 3) body size categories for many European aquatic macroinvertebrate taxa are available from the trait database freshwaterecology.info, ameliorating the requirement to measure every taxa for the analysis of interspecific body size. Access to collection of RMO aquatic macroinvertebrates is required as the collection is extensive, as is the proposed number of taxa to be measured, prohibiting shipping samples. 

    The primary tangible outcomes of the proposed project are: 1) an initial paper on the changes in intra- and interspecific body size of freshwater aquatic macroinvertebrates in Central Germany over the past 20 years, 2) a dataset of aquatic macroinvertebrate body size traits which can be provided to trait databases (e.g. freshwaterecology.info), and 3) a protocol for collecting macroinvertebrate body size measurements, which can be used again by the project organizers and additionally recruited collaborators to conduct a follow-up project investigating the effects of temperature on macroinvertebrate body size across a greater coverage of temperature ranges, space, time, and taxa.

